.TH CASSONIC 1 "2026-06-10" "cassonic" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
cassonic \- self-hosted music streaming server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cassonic
[\fIflags\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cassonic
is a self-hosted music streaming server with Subsonic, Ampache, and native REST API compatibility.
It serves music libraries over HTTP/HTTPS, supports Tor hidden services, and runs as a single
static binary with no external runtime dependencies.
.SH FLAGS
.TP
.BR \-\-help ", " \-h
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-version ", " \-v
Show version information and exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-mode " production|development"
Server operating mode.
.I production
minimises log verbosity and enables security headers.
.I development
enables verbose logging and hot reload.
Default: \fIproduction\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-config " dir"
Override the configuration directory.
Default: \fI/etc/local/cassonic/\fR (root) or \fI~/.config/local/cassonic/\fR (user).
.TP
.BI \-\-data " dir"
Override the data directory.
Default: \fI/var/lib/local/cassonic/\fR (root) or \fI~/.local/share/local/cassonic/\fR (user).
.TP
.BI \-\-cache " dir"
Override the cache directory.
Default: \fI/var/cache/local/cassonic/\fR (root) or \fI~/.cache/local/cassonic/\fR (user).
.TP
.BI \-\-log " dir"
Override the log directory.
Default: \fI/var/log/local/cassonic/\fR (root) or \fI~/.local/log/local/cassonic/\fR (user).
.TP
.BI \-\-address " addr"
Listen address.
Default: all interfaces.
.TP
.BI \-\-port " port"
Listen port.
Default: \fI4533\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-baseurl " path"
Base URL path prefix (e.g. \fI/music\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable debug output. Can also be set via the \fIDEBUG\fR environment variable.
.TP
.B \-\-scan
Run a full library scan and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-status
Print server status (running, version, uptime) and exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-pid " file"
Write the server process ID to \fIfile\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-install
Install cassonic as a system service and exit.
Equivalent to \fB\-\-service \-\-install\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-uninstall
Remove the cassonic system service and exit.
Equivalent to \fB\-\-service \-\-uninstall\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-backup " dir"
Directory for backup archives.
Required when using \fB\-\-maintenance backup\fR or \fB\-\-maintenance restore\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-tor\-key " file"
Path to persist the Tor hidden service ed25519 private key.
Providing this flag enables the Tor hidden service.
.TP
.BI \-\-service " cmd"
Manage the cassonic system service.
.I cmd
is one of: \fBstart\fR, \fBrestart\fR, \fBstop\fR, \fBreload\fR, \fB\-\-install\fR, \fB\-\-uninstall\fR, \fB\-\-disable\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR.
Note: \fBstart\fR prints guidance on starting via the host init system rather than starting the process directly.
.TP
.B \-\-daemon
Fork cassonic to run in the background.
.TP
.BI \-\-maintenance " cmd"
Run a maintenance operation.
.I cmd
is one of: \fBbackup\fR, \fBrestore\fR, \fBupdate\fR, \fBmode\fR, \fBsetup\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-update " cmd"
Check for or apply binary updates.
.I cmd
is one of: \fBcheck\fR, \fByes\fR, \fBbranch=stable\fR, \fBbranch=beta\fR, \fBbranch=daily\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-lang " code"
Set the UI language.
Supported codes: \fBen\fR, \fBes\fR, \fBfr\fR, \fBde\fR, \fBzh\fR, \fBja\fR, \fBar\fR.
Default: \fIen\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-color " auto|yes|no"
Control ANSI colour output.
Default: \fIauto\fR (enabled when stdout is a terminal).
Respects the \fBNO_COLOR\fR environment variable.
.TP
.BI \-\-shell " completions|init" " [SHELL]"
Print shell integration output.
\fBcompletions\fR prints a completion script; \fBinit\fR prints a one-line snippet suitable for \fBeval\fR.
Optional \fISHELL\fR is one of \fBbash\fR, \fBzsh\fR, \fBfish\fR; auto-detected from \fB$SHELL\fR if omitted.
Use \fB\-\-shell \-\-help\fR for usage examples.
.TP
.B \-\-tls
Enable TLS (HTTPS).
.TP
.BI \-\-tls\-domain " domain"
Domain name for automatic Let's Encrypt certificate provisioning.
.TP
.BI \-\-tls\-email " email"
Email address for Let's Encrypt ACME account registration.
.TP
.BI \-\-tls\-cert " file"
Path to a local TLS certificate file (PEM format).
.TP
.BI \-\-tls\-key " file"
Path to a local TLS private key file (PEM format).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MODE
Equivalent to \fB\-\-mode\fR. Overridden by the flag if both are set.
.TP
.B DEBUG
Set to \fB1\fR, \fBtrue\fR, or \fByes\fR to enable debug output. Overridden by \fB\-\-debug\fR.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
When set to a non-empty value, disables ANSI colour output regardless of \fB\-\-color\fR.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/local/cassonic/server.yml
System-wide configuration file (privileged installation).
.TP
.I ~/.config/local/cassonic/server.yml
Per-user configuration file (user installation).
.TP
.I /var/lib/local/cassonic/
Data directory for privileged installations (databases, music index).
.TP
.I /var/log/local/cassonic/
Log directory for privileged installations.
.SH EXAMPLES
Start the server in the foreground:
.PP
.RS
.B cassonic
.RE
.PP
Run a library scan and exit:
.PP
.RS
.B cassonic \-\-scan
.RE
.PP
Install as a system service:
.PP
.RS
.B cassonic \-\-service \-\-install
.RE
.PP
Create a backup archive:
.PP
.RS
.B cassonic \-\-backup /mnt/backups \-\-maintenance backup
.RE
.PP
Enable shell completions (bash):
.PP
.RS
.B eval "$(cassonic \-\-shell init bash)"
.RE
.PP
Enable shell completions (zsh):
.PP
.RS
.B eval "$(cassonic \-\-shell init zsh)"
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
Full documentation at the project site.
Subsonic API documentation: \fIhttp://www.subsonic.org/pages/api.jsp\fR.
.SH BUGS
Report issues at the project repository.
.SH LICENSE
MIT License.
